#+SETUPFILE: setup.org
#+TITLE: The Norvig - Chomsky debate



* Science vs. pseudoscience (the demarcation problem)

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
According to Paul Thagard, a theory or discipline is pseudoscientific
if it satisfies two criteria. One of these is that the theory fails to
progress, and the other that "the community of practitioners makes
little attempt to develop the theory towards solutions of the
problems, shows no concern for attempts to evaluate the theory in
relation to others, and is selective in considering confirmations and
disconfirmations" (Thagard 1978, 228). --- [[http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/pseudo-science/][Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy]]
#+END_QUOTE

Again, from the [[http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/pseudo-science/][Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy]], another list of
criteria for applying the label "pseudoscience" are,

1. /Belief in authority/: It is contended that some person or persons
   have a special ability to determine what is true or false. Others
   have to accept their judgments.

2. /Nonrepeatable experiments/: Reliance is put on experiments that
   cannot be repeated by others with the same outcome.

3. /Handpicked examples/: Handpicked examples are used although they
   are not representative of the general category that the
   investigation refers to.

4. /Unwillingness to test/: A theory is not tested although it is
   possible to test it.

5. /Disregard of refuting information/: Observations or experiments
   that conflict with a theory are neglected.

6. /Built-in subterfuge/: The testing of a theory is so arranged that
   the theory can only be confirmed, never disconfirmed, by the
   outcome.

7. /Explanations are abandoned without replacement./ Tenable
   explanations are given up without being replaced, so that the new
   theory leaves much more unexplained than the previous
   one. (Hansson 1983)

| astrology           | astronomy       |
| creationism         | evolution       |
| homeopathy          | modern medicine |
| Holocaust denialism | history         |

* What is an explanation?

Knowing what makes an explanation is important to knowing what makes a
pursuit scientific. Generally, science seeks explanations, and
explanations give understanding.

The deductive-nomological model of explanation has been highly
influential (from Hempel and Oppenheim, 1948). It says that an
explanation requires a pairing of a law with the facts of a case,
which together imply what needs to be explained.

For example, an explanation of "why is Maisy sneezing?" could be "any
person with an allergy to grass and exposure to grass will sneeze;
plus, Maisy has an allergy to grass and was exposed to grass." The
thing to be explained can be deduced from the explanation.

The problem with this model is it seems not every explanation has to
imply the thing to be explained. For example, I might explain the fact
I have a broken arm with a story about a car accident. However, I do
not mention any "laws" and furthermore there is no natural law that
says car accidents cause broken arms.

In another example, a law may be present and deduction may work but
the "explanation" may not at all be explanatory. Consider the shadow
from a flag pole. The shadow is caused by the position of the sun and
the height of the pole. There relation can be described
mathematically, so that the shadow's length is the result of a
function applied to the sun's position and the pole height. The shadow
would be explained (in a deductive-nomological sense). However, we
could use algebra to rewrite the equation so that the height of the
pole depends on the length of the shadow. We still have a
deductive-nomological "explanation" but it makes no sense to say that
the length of the shadow /explains/ the height of the pole. The
shadow is an effect, an outcome, of the height of the pole, so the
shadow cannot explain the height.

#+BEGIN_CENTER
[[./images/moon-flagpole-shadows.jpg]]

Was the moon landing a hoax? From [[http://www.clavius.org/shadlen.html][Clavius.org]]
#+END_CENTER

Most useful explanations describe or hint at a causal story. This is
why the flag pole's height explains the shadow but not vice
versa. Likewise, a car accident explains a broken arm, and allergies
explain sneezing. Furthermore, most "good" explanations give us an
/understanding/ of what happened and why.

There are lots of theories about what consitutes an explanation,
what exactly is causation, and whether "understanding" is necessary
for something to be explanatory. However, for the purposes of this
discussion, we'll just work with our intuition about what an
explanation is, what makes something explanatory, what it is like to
understand an explanation.

* The debate

Recently, Peter Norvig took the time to [[http://norvig.com/chomsky.html][write a response]] to a comment
Noam Chomsky made at a conference (not a comment made to Norvig, but
to an entire research community of which Norvig considers himself a
part). (Chomsky has a new [[http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2012/11/noam-chomsky-on-where-artificial-intelligence-went-wrong/261637/?single_page=true&][reply]] to Norvig.) Chomsky said at the
conference,

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
It's true there's been a lot of work on trying to apply statistical
models to various linguistic problems. I think there have been some
successes, but a lot of failures. There is a notion of success...
which I think is novel in the history of science. It interprets
success as approximating unanalyzed data.
#+END_QUOTE

In Chomsky's recent interview in which he replies to Norvig, he makes
a similar point (emphasis added):

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
I thought [early attempts at AI] was first of all way too optimistic,
it was assuming you could achieve things that required real
understanding of systems that were barely understood, and *you just
can't get to that understanding by throwing a complicated machine at
it*. If you try to do that you are led to a conception of success,
which is self-reinforcing, because you do get success in terms of this
conception, but *it's very different from what's done in the
sciences*. So for example, take an extreme case, suppose that somebody
says he wants to eliminate the physics department and do it the right
way. The "right" way is to take endless numbers of videotapes of
what's happening outside the video, and feed them into the biggest and
fastest computer, gigabytes of data, and do complex statistical
analysis --- you know, Bayesian this and that --- and you'll get some
kind of prediction about what's gonna happen outside the window
next. In fact, *you get a much better prediction than the physics
department will ever give*. Well, if success is defined as getting a
fair approximation to a mass of chaotic unanalyzed data, then it's way
better to do it this way than to do it the way the physicists do, you
know, no thought experiments about frictionless planes and so on and
so forth. *But you won't get the kind of understanding that the
sciences have always been aimed at* --- what you'll get at is an
approximation to what's happening.

[...]

A very different approach, which I think is the right approach, is to
try to see if you can understand what the *fundamental principles* are
that deal with the core properties, and recognize that in the actual
usage, there's going to be a thousand other variables intervening ---
kind of like what's happening outside the window, and you'll sort of
tack those on later on if you want better approximations, that's a
different approach. These are just two different concepts of
science. The second one is what science has been since Galileo, that's
modern science. *The approximating unanalyzed data kind is sort of a
new approach*, not totally, there's things like it in the past. It's
basically a new approach that has been *accelerated by the existence
of massive memories, very rapid processing*, which enables you to do
things like this that you couldn't have done by hand. But I think,
myself, that it is leading subjects like computational cognitive
science into a direction of maybe some practical applicability...

Interviewer: "... in engineering?"

Chomsky: ... *But away from understanding*.
#+END_QUOTE

Norvig has been successful building AI systems that use statistical
learning and statistical inferencing. He takes issue with Chomsky's
claim that, essentially, what modern AI research is doing is not
science.

Chomsky is (in)famous for hypothesizing and arguing that all humans
have a tacit but unlearned knowledge of linguistic structure, a
universal grammar. He believes the evidence for this hypothesis is
that children cannot possibly learn all that they do about their first
language just from what they hear. Rather, the structure of language
is so deep and sophisticated that children must already have the
mental structures needed, and do not learn these structures from
experience. An important structure, for example, is the ability to
understand recursive utterances, such as:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
My homework assignment, which is worth 100 points in my CSE 3521
class, which is not required for my major but I wanted to take it
anyway, which has turned out to be quite interesting as it happens, is
due Thursday.
#+END_QUOTE

Although that sentence is a bit contrived, we can understand it
(spoken or written). There are limits to how much recursive structure
we can keep in our short-term memory, but there is clearly (or not?) a
logic to it. How does a child learn this logic?

Another phenomenon that Chomsky points out is that adverbs, pronouns,
and the like do not always modify or connect to the nearest candidate
word, in a linear sense. Rather, they are related to the structurally
closest word, which may not be closest in an utterance. He
hypothesizes that the understanding of language in the brain does not
take the same form as language as written or spoken (the structures in
the brain are not linear, he believes).

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Take a simple sentence like "Instinctively, eagles that fly swim",
well, "instinctively" goes with swim, it doesn't go with fly, even
though it doesn't make sense. And that's reflexive. "Instinctively",
the adverb, isn't looking for the nearest verb, it's looking for the
structurally most prominent one. That's a much harder computation. But
that's the only computation which is ever used. Linear order is a very
easy computation, but it's never used.
#+END_QUOTE

However, linear order is a surface-level phenomenon that, supposedly,
is among the phenomenon that stastical approaches will utilize. A
statistical approach may get good results, usually, by exploiting the
linear order of an utterance but, Chomsky argues, the linear order
and the statistics provide no understanding about the sentence. The
linear order is just a side-effect, a shadow of the true structure.

Norvig's estimation of Chomsky's points, and Norvig's replies, are as
follows:

- *Chomsky's point*: Statistical methods have had engineering success,
  but that is irrelevant to science.

  - *Norvig's reply*: He agrees, but engineering success often
    facilitates scientific success.

- *Chomsky's point*: Accurate modeling of language (e.g. statistical
  models) is just building descriptions, not explanations.

  - *Norvig's reply*: Science is both description and explanation; you
    can't have one without the other; in the history of science, the
    laborious accumulation of data is the usual mode of operation.

- *Chomsky's point*: Language is generated from internal structures,
  and understood by transforming what's heard or read into these
  structures; language is not generated or understood in the same form
  as it comes out (in linear form). The way language is spoken or
  written is just a peripheral after-effect, not the
  essence.

  - *Norvig's reply*: People who work in language interpretation
    (presumably, in the AI field) see it as a statistical inference;
    people actually generate and understand language in some rich
    statistical sense (maybe with statistical models several layers
    deep, like the modern AI models of speech recognition).

- *Chomsky's point*: Statistical models are incapable of learning all
  the richness of natural language.

  - *Norvig's reply*: Certain advances in statistical learning methods
    provide reason to believe that such learning methods will be able
    to do the job.

#+CAPTION: "Building Blocks," Kumi Yamashita, 1997; H230, W400, D5cm; wood, single light source, shadow
[[./images/kumi-yamashita-building-blocks.jpg]]

* Science: modeling or insight?

Norvig argues that when Chomsky says "[Just accurately modeling the
world is] a notion of [scientific] success that's very novel. I don't
know of anything like it in the history of science," he is
wrong. Norvig scanned issues of /Science/, /Cell/, and looked at the
2010 Nobel Prizes in science. He then writes,

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
My conclusion is that 100% of these articles and awards are more about
"accurately modeling the world" than they are about "providing
insight," although they all have some theoretical insight component as
well.
#+END_QUOTE

* Case in point? "i before e except after c"

Norvig illustrates that rules about language do not always capture the
right phenomena.

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
P(IE) = 0.0177         P(CIE) = 0.0014        P(*IE) = 0.163
P(EI) = 0.0046         P(CEI) = 0.0005        P(*EI) = 0.0041
#+END_EXAMPLE

This model comes from statistics on a corpus of a trillion words of
English text. The notation P(IE) is the probability that a word
sampled from this corpus contains the consecutive letters "IE." P(CIE)
is the probability that a word contains the consecutive letters "CIE",
and P(*IE) is the probability of any letter other than C followed by
IE. The statistical data confirms that IE is in fact more common than
EI, and that the dominance of IE lessens when following a C, but
contrary to the rule, CIE is still more common than CEI. Examples of
"CIE" words include "science," "society," "ancient" and "species." The
disadvantage of the "I before E except after C" model is that it is
not very accurate.

* Are statistical models ok?

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Norvig: Every probabilistic model is a superset of a deterministic
model (because the deterministic model could be seen as a
probabilistic model where the probabilities are restricted to be 0 or
1), so any valid criticism of probabilistic models would have to be
because they are too expressive, not because they are not expressive
enough.
#+END_QUOTE

I feel that this is a bit disingenuous. Probabilisitic models rarely
express complex, deep relationships among data because such
relationships are hard to discover via a hands-off training
process. On the other hand, rule-based systems often have quite
complex and deep rules (because, apparently, sometimes such rules are
necessary), which are made possible by the fact that a human is
creating them.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Norvig: And yes, it seems clear that an adult speaker of English does
know billions of language facts (for example, that one says "big game"
rather than "large game" when talking about an important football
game). These facts must somehow be encoded in the brain.
#+END_QUOTE

Fair enough. There does seem to be a statistical bias in language
generation, like the feeling of a word just rolling off the tongue,
before you have thought about it. That effect is probably what
produces "big game" rather than "large game."

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Norvig: For example, the verb /quake/ is listed as intransitive in
dictionaries, meaning that (1) below is grammatical, and (2) is not,
according to a categorical theory of grammar.

  1. The earth quaked.
  2. ? It quaked her bowels. 

But (2) actually appears as a sentence of English. This poses a
dilemma for the categorical theory.
#+END_QUOTE

Norvig also says that interpretation is different than generation:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Norvig: From the beginning, Chomsky has focused on the generative side
of language. From this side, it is reasonable to tell a
non-probabilistic story: I know definitively the idea I want to
express---I'm starting from a single semantic form---thus all I have
to do is choose the words to say it; why can't that be a
deterministic, categorical process? If Chomsky had focused on the
other side, interpretation, as Claude Shannon did, he may have changed
his tune. In interpretation (such as speech recognition) the listener
receives a noisy, ambiguous signal and needs to decide which of many
possible intended messages is most likely. Thus, it is obvious that
this is inherently a probabilistic problem[...]
#+END_QUOTE

But why the distinction?

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Norvig: We also now know that language is like that as well: languages
are complex, random, contingent biological processes that are subject
to the whims of evolution and cultural change. What constitutes a
language is not an eternal ideal form, represented by the settings of
a small number of parameters, but rather is the contingent outcome of
complex processes. Since they are contingent, it seems they can only
be analyzed with probabilistic models. Since people have to
continually understand the uncertain, ambiguous, noisy speech of
others, it seems they must be using something like probabilistic
reasoning. Chomsky for some reason wants to avoid this, and therefore
he must declare the actual facts of language use out of bounds and
declare that true linguistics only exists in the mathematical realm,
where he can impose the formalism he wants. Then, to get language from
this abstract, eternal, mathematical realm into the heads of people,
he must fabricate a mystical facility that is exactly tuned to the
eternal realm. This may be very interesting from a mathematical point
of view, but it misses the point about what language is, and how it
works.
#+END_QUOTE

But is it not equally true that a statistical conception of language
likewise requires a fantastically rich and sophisticated model in
order to generate and understand highly-structured, subtle,
carefully-crafted utterances that intelligent humans are known for?
Again, there is a missing link, no proof-by-demonstration.

* A statistical model for an aspect of language acquisition

How do statistical models for language acquisition perform? Here is a
historical case in point, along with a critique.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
On the evidence that what we will and won't say and what we will and
won't accept can be characterized by rules, it has been argued that,
in some sene, we "know" the rules of our language. The sense in which
we know them is not the same as the sense in which we know such
"rules" as "/i/ before /e/ except after /c/," however, since we need
not necessarily be able to state the rules explicitly. We know them in
a way that allows us to use them to make judgments of grammaticality,
it is often said, or to speak and understand, but this knowledge is
not in a form or location that permits it to be encoded into a
communicable verbal statement. --- "On Learning the Past Tenses of
English Verbs," Rumelhart and McClelland, 1986 ([[http://psych.stanford.edu/~jlm/papers/PDP/Chapter18.pdf][PDF]])
#+END_QUOTE

** The phenomenon

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
In Stage 1, children use only a small number of verbs in the past
tense. Such verbs tend to be very high-frequency words, and the
majority of these are irregular. At this stage, children tend to get
the past tenses of these words correct if they use the past tense at
all.

[...]

In Stage 2, evidence of implicit knowledge of a linguistic rule
emerges. At this stage, children use a much larger number of verbs in
the past tense. These verbs include a few more irregular items, but it
turns out that the majority of the words at this stage are examples of
the /regular/ past tense in English. [...]

  - The child can now generate a past tense for an invented word.

  - Children now /incorrectly/ supply regular past-tense endings for
    words which they used correctly in Stage 1. These errors may
    involve either adding /ed/ to the root as in /comed/, or adding
    /ed/ to the irregular past tense form as in /camed/.

[...]

In Stage 3, the regular and irregular forms coexist. That is, children
have regained the use of the correct irregular forms of the past
tense, while they continue to apply the regular form to new words they
learn. Regularization persists into adulthood [...]
#+END_QUOTE

The authors further add that the stages are not well-delineated, and
that the acquisition process is gradual.

They develop a statistical neural network model that, when given
example verbs (like a child hearing them used), produces behavior
exactly like that described in the three stages (above).

#+BEGIN_CENTER
[[./images/verb-past-tense-response-rate.png]]
#+END_CENTER

** A critique

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Classical models [...] account for this [phenomenon] in an intuitively
obvious way. They posit an initial stage in which the child has
effectively memorized a small set of forms in a totally unsystematic
and unconnected way. This is stage one. At stage two, according to
this story, the child manages to extract a rule covering a large
number of cases. But the rule is now mistakenly deployed to generate
/all/ past tenses. At the final stage this is put right. Now the child
uses lexical, memorized, item-indexed resources to handle irregular
cases and non-lexical, rule-based resources to handle regular
ones. --- "Critique of Rumelhart and McClelland," Andy Clark, 1989
([[http://books.google.com/books?id=mv2vGDT-6KIC&lpg=PR9&ots=4DiaSlw07A&dq=%22Critique%20of%20Rumelhart%20and%20McClelland%22%20%22Andy%20Clark%22&lr&pg=PA553#v=onepage&q&f=false][Google Books link]])
#+END_QUOTE

There are problems with the statistical neural network model
(according to Clark, who is summarizing "[[http://users.ecs.soton.ac.uk/harnad/Papers/Py104/pinker.conn.html][On language and
connectionism]]," Pinker and Prince, 1988):

  - *Overreliance on the environment*: the stage 1 to stage 2
    transition of the model was achieved solely because only irregular
    verbs were presented to it first, followed by a "massive influx"
    of regular verbs. Generally, neural nets can learn virtually
    anything (approximate any function), but their ability to do so
    depends highly on the nature of the inputs. "Given a different set
    of inputs, these models might go straight to stage 2, or even
    regress from stage 2 to stage 1. It is at least not obvious that
    human infants enjoy the same degree of freedom."

  - *The power of learning algorithms*: statistical approaches are
    often too good. Humans do a poor job detecting statistical
    correlations. For example, we have a hard time learning how to
    efficiently match words to their reverse images, yet a statistical
    model could learn that perfectly. A good model of language
    acquisition should also explain what we cannot learn.

  - *Microfeature representations*: humans do not seem to treat all
    features of an observation equally. We do not see a word as a
    sequence of equally-important letters. Pinker and Prince give the
    example, "an animal that looks exactly like a skunk will
    nonetheless be treated as a raccoon if one is told that the stripe
    was painted onto an animal that had raccoon parents and raccoon
    babies."

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
The single most obvious phenomenon about the meanings of words is the
difficulty of focusing consciousness upon them. If I ask you what
does the verb "sight" mean in the sentence:

He sighted a herd of elephants on the plain

then you are immediately aware that you know the meaning of the word,
and that you understand the sentence with no difficulty. You should
also be able to offer a paraphrase of the word, such as:

to see something at a distance.

But the formulation of this paraphrase is not an immediate and
automatic process. You cannot turn to the appropriate definition in a
mental dictionary and read out the contents that you find there. It
may take a second or two to formulate a definition, and in some cases,
as we shall see, you may be unable to give a helpful definition at
all. In short, you have an immediate awareness of knowing the sense of
a word, but you have no direct introspect access to the representation
of its meaning.
#+END_QUOTE

* What if k-nearest neighbor was a scientific theory about irises?

Clearly, we have to make this question about irises and not
classification in general. Now, our examples with [[./k-nn.html][k-nn]] on irises used
four iris measurements: sepal width and length, and petal width and
length.

Suppose k-nn with $k=3$ works well on our test data. Now, if it was a
scientific theory, what would it be saying?

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Supposing the only requirement to be a species is that only the
members of the same species can interbreed and produce fertile
offspring, the species of the iris plant is determined by sepal width
and length and petal width and length.
#+END_QUOTE

Curiously, the fact that $k=3$ worked best in our tests, and not, say,
$k=100$, never appears in this description of the theory. Maybe k-nn
is actually saying,

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Supposing the only requirement..., the species of the iris plant is
determined by taking a large sample (how large?) of iris plants and
measuring their sepal width and length and petal width and length. The
species of an iris plant not in the sample is determined by the most
common species among the three "closest" samples (where closeness is
defined as a Euclidean "distance" between the four measurements of the
irises).
#+END_QUOTE

This formulation is much less scientific since it's too specific. It
doesn't sound like a very good law.

If either of these theories is correct, what would they offer in terms
of "explanation" of iris species distinctions?

In what sense are "species" explanatory anyway?

* Pandora vs. Netflix

Pandora is rule-driven (see: [[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Music_Genome_Project_attributes]["music genome" attributes]]), while Netflix
is not. Which performs better?

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Each song in the Music Genome Project is analyzed using up to 450
distinct musical characteristics by a trained music analyst. These
attributes capture not only the musical identity of a song, but also
the many significant qualities that are relevant to understanding the
musical preferences of listeners.

[...]

Pandora does not use machine-listening or other forms of automated
data extraction. --- From Pandora's [[http://www.pandora.com/about/mgp]["About" page]]
#+END_QUOTE

During their Netflix prize competition, Netflix briefly described
their machine learning task and the kind of data they used. From a
2007 paper ([[http://reference.kfupm.edu.sa/content/n/e/the_netflix_prize_67297.pdf][PDF]]) describing the Netflix prize, before the competition
ended:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
In October, 2006 Netflix released a dataset containing 100 million
anonymous movie ratings and challenged the data mining, machine
learning and computer science communities to develop systems that
could beat the accuracy of its recommendation system, Cinematch.
#+END_QUOTE

Movie recommendations are based only on the user's ratings and others'
ratings.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
The company reported the [root mean square error (RMSE)] performance of
Cinematch trained on the Prize dataset against the quiz subset as
0.9514, a 9.6% improvement over simply predicting individual movie
averages [which was 1.0540 RMSE]).

The company will award a Grand Prize to the team with a system that
can improve on that accuracy by an additional 10%. In addition,
Progress Prizes will be awarded on the anniversaries of the Prize to
teams that make sufficient accuracy improvements.
#+END_QUOTE

#+BEGIN_CENTER
[[./images/netflix-results.png]]
#+END_CENTER

In 2009, a team did win the prize, with a 10.1% improvement over
Netflix's algorithm.

Although I have not provided any information about the algorithms, the
question related to this discussion is, "Ok, so what do these
statistical models and methods tell us about why humans like the
movies they do?"

The same question can be asked about Pandora's approach. Which
technique is more "explanatory?"

#+CAPTION: Dice Sculptures, Tony Cragg
[[./images/dicesculptures-2.jpg]]

* Some difficult cases

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
colorless green ideas sleep furiously

--- Noam Chomsky
#+END_EXAMPLE

Chomsky says about this sentence:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Neither (a) 'colorless green ideas sleep furiously' nor (b) 'furiously
sleep ideas green colorless', nor any of their parts, has ever
occurred in the past linguistic experience of an English speaker. But
(a) is grammatical, while (b) is not.
#+END_QUOTE

Norvig replies,

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Chomsky appears to be correct that neither sentence appeared in the
published literature before 1955. I'm not sure what he meant by "any
of their parts," but certainly every two-word part had occurred, for
example: "It is neutral green, colorless green, like the glaucous
water lying in a cellar." The Paris we remember, Elisabeth Finley
Thomas (1942).  "To specify those green ideas is hardly necessary, but
you may observe Mr. [D. H.] Lawrence in the role of the satiated
aesthete." The New Republic: Volume 29 p. 184, William White (1922).
"Ideas sleep in books." Current Opinion: Volume 52, (1912).
#+END_QUOTE

Furthermore, Norvig says,

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
[...] a statistically-trained finite-state model can in fact
distinguish between these two sentences. Pereira (2001) showed that
such a model, augmented with word categories and trained by
expectation maximization on newspaper text, computes that (a) is
200,000 times more probable than (b).

Furthermore, the statistical models are capable of delivering the
judgment that both sentences are extremely improbable, when compared
to, say, "Effective green products sell well." Chomsky's theory, being
categorical, cannot make this distinction; all it can distinguish is
grammatical/ungrammatical.
#+END_QUOTE

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
Every farmer who owns a donkey beats it.

Every farmer who owns a tractor uses it to drive to church on Sundays.

Some farmers who own a donkey beat it.

--- infamous "donkey sentence" and variants
#+END_EXAMPLE

These "donkey sentences" are used as test cases for theories about
anaphora ("anaphora" is the use of terms like "it," "her," "himself,"
etc. which refer to another part of the sentence).

In the first sentence, for example, how do we know that "it" refers to
the donkey that each farmer owns? Does "it" also refer to all donkeys
owned by a single farmer?

What is the correct translation of this first sentence into predicate
logic?

$$(\forall x)((farmer(x) \wedge (\exists y)(donkey(y) \wedge
owns(x,y))) \rightarrow beat(x,y))$$

That can't be right; $y$ on the right side is not bound to any
value. It doesn't properly refer to the donkey.

How about,

$$(\forall x)(\exists y)((farmer(x) \wedge donkey(y) \wedge owns(x,y))
\rightarrow beat(x,y))$$

From [[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Donkey_sentence][Wikipedia]]:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
In this case, the logical translation fails to give correct truth
conditions to donkey sentences: Imagine a situation where there is a
farmer owning a donkey and a pig, and not beating any of them. The
formula will be true in that situation, because for each farmer we
need to find at least one object that either is not a donkey owned by
this farmer [making the left side of $\rightarrow$ false], or is
beaten by the farmer. Hence, if this object denotes the pig, the
sentence will be [vaccuously] true in that situation.
#+END_QUOTE

Etc...

* The edge of understanding

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Outside a psychological laboratory, the recognition of words is
seldom an end in itself, because listeners want to understand what
they hear. --- Johnson-Laird
#+END_QUOTE

Perhaps the same can be said about the written word.

#+BEGIN_HTML
<pre class="example">


<div style="text-align: center">
a leaf 
left   
by the 
cat    
I guess
</div>


--- Aram Saroyan
</pre>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
<pre class="example">


<div style="text-align: center">
My cup is yellow    
Or not, though not's

Impossible          
It's yellow         
</div>


--- Aram Saroyan
</pre>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
<pre class="example">


<div style="text-align: center">
I leaps

through
my eyes
</div>


--- Aram Saroyan
</pre>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
<pre class="example">


<div style="text-align: center">
a window to walk away
in                   
</div>


--- Aram Saroyan
</pre>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
"Gamut"

Much ado about trees lichen
hugs alga and fungus live
off each other hoe does
dear owe dear earth terrace
money sunday coffee poorjoe snow

--- Louis Zukofsky
#+END_EXAMPLE

#+BEGIN_HTML
<pre class="example">


<div style="text-align: center">
lighght
</div>

--- Aram Saroyan
</pre>
#+END_HTML

#+CAPTION: "Lovers," Kumi Yamashita, 1999; H190, W240, D15cm; cut aluminum plate, single light source, shadow
[[./images/kumi-yamashita-lovers.jpg]]

#+INCLUDE: footer.org
